\chapter{New Commonwealth conditions are not the way to go}\label{chap:Commonwealth-conditions}

This chapter argues that the Commonwealth should have a modest role in the overall bigger reform picture to improve school education. It should refrain from expanding its control over school spending as a way to improve learning. Prescriptive Commonwealth funding conditions have been tried before for little benefit. They often come with large administrative costs and lead to the states making ‘tick-a-box’ responses. 

\section{The Commonwealth is seeking to expand its influence}\label{sec:Commonwealth-influence}

Australia’s poor school results are a national concern. The time is ripe for a discussion on the Commonwealth’s role, as it negotiates a New Agreement on school funding with the states and territories.

The Commonwealth wants to ensure that its extra 23 billion of schools funding will be spent wisely. This Review has been commissioned to inform future Commonwealth policy.

But the Commonwealth should keep its desire to expand control in check. The extra Commonwealth funds are only 3.3 per cent of all government spending on schools from 2018 to 2027. The more fundamental question is how to wisely spend all the money invested in schooling.

In the next sections we evaluate the different ways the Commonwealth could expand its control over spending.

\subsection{Federal control could be gained in different ways}\label{subsec:Commonwealth-control}

Ensuring that schools and states are held accountable for students’ educational progress is a sensible proposition – but the Commonwealth should tread warily when seeking to increase ‘accountability’. If federal policy makers pull the wrong levers, the consequences can be large. 
The Commonwealth can exert greater control over school education policy through Section 96 of the Constitution, which allows for conditions on Commonwealth funding to state and territory governments. 

Conditions on funding can come in various forms, some more prescriptive than others. For example the Commonwealth could make funding conditional on the states and territories achieving or reporting against:
\begin{itemize}
    \item Specified inputs and outputs;
    \item Outcomes, with financial penalties for governments that fail to meet targets; and
    \item Quality assurance frameworks, for example requiring the states to show how they spend money in line with the evidence.
\end{itemize}

This chapter mainly discusses the merits of financial conditions on inputs and outputs, given this possibility was flagged in the Commonwealth’s policy document, Quality Schools, Quality Outcomes 2016. This chapter also briefly critiques other types of conditions (outcomes-based, and quality assurance frameworks), drawing on the experience in US federal policy.

\subsection{Input and output conditions may be on the table}\label{subsec:input-and-ouput}

The Commonwealth appears to be considering `increased conditionality', based on specific inputs and outputs in areas of traditional state responsibilities.

For example, the Commonwealth’s 2016 strategic document Quality Schools, Quality Outcomes included many input and output reform initiatives that state governments could be required to implement\footnote{Citation needed here.} (although the status of some of these reforms is still unclear).

Further, the federal Department of Education and Training states on its website that the Review will `make sure that reform actions are based on solid foundations' and that `implementation of reforms will be a condition of funding for states'.\footnote{Citation needed here.} 

The next subsection discusses the risks of such an approach.

\subsection{We must learn from history}\label{subsec:learn-from-history}

We recommend against the Commonwealth imposing new funding conditions on input or outputs. It has been tried before and produced few benefits for large costs.

Deliberate decisions were taken to move away from Commonwealth input process controls and burdensome reporting of the past. The 2008 Council of Australian Government (COAG) reform agenda signalled a shift to outcomes-based conditions, in an attempt to leave behind the old bureaucratic processes. However as the reform agenda rolled out there was more focus on inputs and processes than intended. Many costs arose that arguably reduced the overall value of the process.

Of course the benefits of COAG should not be overlooked. The National Education Agreement helped establish much of today’s national policy architecture. It introduced national performance benchmarking, professional teaching and leadership standards, and a national curriculum. A number of initiatives were successful, and many were rigorously evaluated, adding to the knowledge base on what works.

But there were many costs related to input and output control elements that outweighed the benefits.

The 2014 Federation White Paper documents some of the learnings from the COAG reform efforts.%
\footcite{2014AustralianGovernmentReformoftheFederationWhitePaper}
It called for a better allocation of roles and responsibilities to make it easier for governments to identify what the problems are in education and who is responsible for fixing them, and for the public to identify who is accountable.  It said confusion about accountability can arise where state governments focus on reporting to the Commonwealth rather than to their constituents.

Policy coherence can be compromised where policy levers are dispersed between Commonwealth and state governments. Where priorities do not align, it can divert attention from existing state reforms. Further, the involvement of an additional tier of government can also create confusion on the ground, especially if policies chop and change. Schools can find themselves working in more uncertain policy and funding climates, which can impede their ability to plan and improve.

Overlapping responsibilities and wasteful duplication of effort can arise.  For example, Commonwealth-run programs related to STEM subjects overlap with state programs. Onerous reporting also increases the regulatory burden, an issue for both federal and state governments that can outweigh any benefits gained.

Lastly, one review of the COAG reform process found that state government `buy-in' to the identified problem and solution is essential for cooperative efforts with the Commonwealth to work. It also found that, ``Unfortunately, this seems to be missing from much of the COAG Reform Agenda \dots As long as that remains the case, progress is likely to be slow and tortuous''.

This issue was well summed up by one commentator on the ambitious federal reforms in the United States: ``The federal government can make states do things, but it is really hard to make them do it well.''

\section{Alternative forms of Commonwealth control do not have clear benefits}\label{sec:other-approaches}

New Commonwealth input and output controls are one possibility for increasing accountability. Other options are to impose conditions that require outcomes-based targets, or reporting against federal quality assurance frameworks. Neither is desirable in the Australian context.

Tying Commonwealth funding to national outcomes-based indicators, with punishment for states that fail to meet targets, can have damaging consequences. For example, the US ‘No Child Left Behind’ policies led to some perverse outcomes for few gains (see Box 2).

And we do not recommend that the Commonwealth establish new quality assurance frameworks. Such an approach is unlikely to be productive given the poor status of Commonwealth-state relations. The US federal government has recently adopted a quality assurance approach under The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (2015), demanding states show the extent to which their policies and programs are evidence-based. It is too early to assess its success. In Australia, state governments would be likely to see such a framework as a threat to their turf, and to respond with `tick-a-box' responses.

To make an arrangement like ESSA work in Australia, the Commonwealth would need to possess the expertise to meaningfully critique state policies and the extent to which they are truly evidence-based; a nuanced task if it is to add-value and incentivise change in state policy making. A framework similar to ESSA would certainly increase red tape. The benefits would need to be considerable to be worth it.

\Vref{box:US-approaches-to-federal-accountability} discusses the US experience of each of these approaches.

\begin{bigbox}{US approaches to federal accountability}{box:US-approaches-to-federal-accountability}

\textbf{No Child Left Behind, 2001 onwards}

The No Child Left Behind (NCLB) policy was introduced with bi-partisan support in 2001, but had such calamitous consequences that there was also bipartisan support for its abolition in 2014.

Under NCLB, the federal government demanded that all states each year test 95 per cent of their students between years 3 and 8 in reading and maths. Schools were punished if they were judged not to have met their (state set) targets on `Adequate Yearly Progress' (AYP). Punitive actions included restructuring of the school, or allowing and encouraging parents to send their children to other schools.

This top-down, high-stakes testing approach created perverse incentives.   For example, state governments began lowering their standards when setting their AYP targets. Teachers began narrowing the curriculum to prepare their students for the tests in reading and maths.  Some schools discouraged students from participating in the tests. Some schools and teachers resorted to desperate measures to alter test records.
By the end, there was unanimous support for reinventing federal policies and abandoning high-stakes testing.

\textbf{The Every Student Succeeds Act (2015)}

ESSA reduces federal control by moving away from demanding high-stakes accountability to demanding states show that their policies and programs are evidence-based.

Under ESSA, all states are still required to monitor and test 95 per cent of their students, but the federal government now allows states to develop their own system of accountability for underperforming schools.

States must show that they have evidence-based plans and interventions to address underperformance. There is an agreed national framework for what constitutes ‘evidence’.

ESSA reduces the punitive consequences for schools not making adequate progress, and will avoid most of the perverse incentives created under NCLB. But it is too early to say whether these policy changes will result in improved education outcomes in the US. 

\end{bigbox}

